                                                                       Effective Date
                     DEPARTMENTAL                                           1 Nov 06
                     GENERAL
                     ORDER                     Index as:


                     A-7                       Annual Report
                                               Departmental Report, Annual
                                               Management Report, Annual



           ANNUAL MANAGEMENT AND DEPARTMENTAL REPORTS


The purpose of this order is to set forth Departmental policy and procedures for submitting
and reviewing annual calendar year information from individual functional units and inter-
agency task forces within the Oakland Police Department.

I.     POLICY


       It shall be the policy of the Department to annually collect performance data from all
       functional units within the Department for review by the Chief of Police. The
       information shall be used to create an Oakland Police Department Annual Report for
       dissemination to the public.


II.    RESPONSIBILITIES

       A.     Bureau of Administration


              1.     The Bureau of Administration Director or designee shall:

                     a.     No later than the first Friday in December, prepare a
                            Memorandum from the Chief of Police for distribution to all
                            functional units in the Department, directing the submittal of

                            an Annual Management Report to their respectivstDivision
                            commander or manager no later than January 31  of the
                            following year; AND

                     b.     Prepare a schedule that will allow Chief of Police and the

                            Bureau Deputy Chiefs/Director to meet with individual
                            Division and/or independent section commanders, managers,
                            and/or supervisors to thoroughly review the submitted Annual
                            Management Reports. These meetings shall be scheduled for
                            the first three weeks in March, or on such dates as to comport

                            with the Chief’s daily schedule.






                                      Page 1 of 5DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER                                     A-7        Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT                                                     1 Nov 06

                     c.     Assign staff to compile the individually submitted Annual

                            Reports into a conthlidated Oakland Police Department Annual
                            Report by July 30 .

                     d.     Coordinate the procurement of supplies and services for the
                            printing and binding of paper copies, making of compact disc

                            copies, and Departmental website posting of the Annual
                            Report.

      B.      Bureau Deputy Chiefs/Director shall:


              1.     Review the annual information reports submitted by Divisions under
                     their purview.

              2.     Coordinate with the Bureau of Administration Director or designee on

                     the meeting schedule noted in Section II, A, 1, b of this order.

      C.      Division and/or independent section commanders, managers, and/or
              supervisors shall:


              1.     Collect and review the Annual Management Reports of their
                     subordinates.

              2.     Collate the information into an executive summary, attaching the unit

                     reports as individual appendices.

              3.     Forward the report to their respective Bureau Deputy Chief/Director
                     no later than February 15 .


      D.      Chief of Police

              1.     During the first three weeks of March, or at such times and dates as
                     to comport with his/her schedule, meet with the Bureau Deputy

                     Chiefs/Director and the respective commanders/managers and/or
                     supervisors to review the Annual Management Report submissions.

              2.     Complete the review process and approve the submissions no later
                     than 10 April.


              3.     Upon approval, forward the appropriate sections of the
                     reports/documents to the Bureau of Administration for production and
                     publication of an Oakland Police Department Annual Report for

                     release to the public.



                                       Page 2 of 5 DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER                                   A-7       Effective Date
 OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT                                                   1 Nov 06

III.   REPORT CONTENT


       All units shall include the following information as part of their Annual Management
       Report:

       A.     Mandatory Information


              All Annual Management Reports shall contain the following information:

              1.     Staffing (authorized versus actual, sworn and professional staff)

                     This section details changes to staff and staffing challenges, i.e., long-

                     term injury/illness absences, temporary reassignments, hiring freezes,
                     promotions, retirements [(identify name, rank, years of service, and
                     type of retirement (service or disability)].

              2.     Fiscal Management Report


                     This section contains an analysis chart of the unit’s budget
                     appropriation and expenditures from the preceding fiscal year
                     (1 Jul–30 Jun).


                     Charts shall consist of the following four (4) column headings:

                     a.     Unit Appropriation Categories (Column 1):

                            11)     O&M;

                            22)     Grants;
                            33)     Personnel (excluding overtime); and
                            44)     Overtime.

                     b.     Budget Appropriation (Column 2) – Enter the dollar amount

                            budgeted for the previous fiscal year.

                     c.     Actual Expenditures (Column 3) – Enter the dollar amount of
                            actual expenditures for the previous fiscal year.


                     d.     Difference (Column 4) – Enter the difference between the
                            actual expenditure (column 3) and the budget appropriation
                            (column 2).

                            Any negative difference (overspending) (column 4) shall

                            require narrative explanations.



                                       Page 3 of 5DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER                                  A-7       Effective Date
OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT                                                  1 Nov 06

                    Exemplar:

                      Appropriation          Budget           Actual       Difference
                        Categories       Appropriation    Expenditures

                           O&M

                           Grants
                         Personnel
                      (excluding O/T)

                         Overtime


             3.     Training Received and/or Provided by Unit Personnel

                    This section includes the subject of the training, number of persons

                    trained, and the length of the training (in hours).

             4.     Significant Accomplishments

                    This section contains a narrative of the unit’s deeds to include, but not

                    limited to, on-going programs, new programs, special projects, and a
                    list of achievements and awards received by the unit or individual
                    personnel assigned to the unit.

             5.     Productivity Performance Data


                    This section contains specific unit-related output statistics, such as
                    citations issued, vehicles towed, warrants cleared, arrests, and
                    attendance at community meetings.


             6.     Other Performance Data

                    This section includes “other” data which may indicate a need for
                    corrective action (i.e., uses of force, discharging of firearms,
                    personnel complaints, vehicle pursuits, preventable vehicle

                    collisions).

             7.     Plans, Expectations, and Goals

                    This section contains a narrative of the unit commander’s current

                    “State of the Unit,” and his/her plans, expectations, and goals for the
                    coming year.





                                      Page 4 of 5 DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER                                A-7       Effective Date
 OAKLAND POLICE DEPARTMENT                                                1 Nov 06

       B.     Optional Information


              Optional information may be included in the Annual Management Report and
              may contain material, such as:

              1.    Photographs of unit personnel engaged in their operational duties.


              2.    Copies of letters received from the public/other agencies recognizing
                    the work of staff.

By order of





Wayne G. Tucker
Chief of Police                                 Date Signed: _____________________



































                                      Page 5 of 5